README.md, before:

# 🏥 MediLens - AI Medical Assistant

> **Private, Offline Medical AI Assistant** for symptom analysis, document processing, and image triage

[![Streamlit App](https://static.streamlit.io/badges/streamlit_badge_black_white.svg)](https://your-app-url.streamlit.app)
![Python](https://img.shields.io/badge/python-3.8+-blue.svg)
![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-MIT-green.svg)

## 🚀 Quick Demo

**Try the live app**: [MediLens on Streamlit Community](https://your-deployed-url.streamlit.app)

![MediLens Demo](f650c04eef1b4bf428e9.png)

---

## ✨ Features

### 💬 **Medical Chat Assistant**
- **Structured medical guidance** with 7 standardized sections
- **Emergency detection** for urgent symptoms
- **Evidence-based responses** optimized for medical accuracy
- **Ultra-fast responses** using Gemma2:2b model

### 📄 **Medical Document Analysis**
- Upload **lab reports, prescriptions, medical documents**
- **OCR text extraction** from PDFs and images
- **Critical value highlighting** with color-coded thresholds
- **Comprehensive interpretation** with actionable recommendations

### 🖼️ **Medical Image Analysis**
- **Visual assessment** of wounds, rashes, injuries
- **Emergency indicator detection** with red-flag alerts
- **Care recommendations** and follow-up guidance
- **Professional medical formatting** with clinical observations

---

## 🎯 For Streamlit Community Deployment

### **Deployment Ready!**
This app is optimized for **Streamlit Community Cloud** deployment with:
- ✅ **No external dependencies** - pure Streamlit + Python
- ✅ **Lightweight models** compatible with cloud hosting
- ✅ **Clean repository** with proper `.gitignore`
- ✅ **Requirements.txt** for easy dependency management

### **Deploy Instructions**

1. **Fork this repository**
2. **Connect to Streamlit Community**: https://share.streamlit.io
3. **Deploy**: Select your forked repo → Deploy!
4. **Configure**: The app will automatically handle model downloads

---

## 🏗️ Local Development Setup

### **Prerequisites**
- **Python 3.8+** ([Download here](https://www.python.org/downloads/))
- **8GB RAM minimum** (16GB recommended)
- **Ollama** for AI models ([Installation guide below](#ollama-installation))

### **Step-by-Step Installation**

#### 1️⃣ Install Ollama (AI Engine)

**Windows:**
```bash
# Download and run the installer
# Visit: https://ollama.com/download/windows
# Or use winget
winget install Ollama.Ollama
```

**macOS:**
```bash
# Install via Homebrew
brew install ollama

# Or download from https://ollama.com/download/mac
```

**Linux:**
```bash
# Install via curl
curl -fsSL https://ollama.com/install.sh | sh
```

#### 2️⃣ Install AI Models

After installing Ollama, open a new terminal and run:

```bash
# Install primary model (1.6 GB)
ollama pull gemma2:2b

# Install fallback model (934 MB)
ollama pull qwen2:1.5b

# Install vision model for image analysis (4.7 GB)
ollama pull llava:7b
```

**Note**: Models will download in the background. This may take 5-15 minutes depending on your internet speed.

#### 3️⃣ Clone & Setup Application

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/TashonBraganca/Medicio-Ai.git
cd Medicio-Ai

# Install Python dependencies
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

#### 4️⃣ (Optional) Install Tesseract OCR

For document scanning capabilities:

**Windows:**
```bash
# Download installer from:
# https://github.com/UB-Mannheim/tesseract/wiki
# Install and add to PATH
```

**macOS:**
```bash
brew install tesseract
```

**Linux:**
```bash
sudo apt-get install tesseract-ocr
```

#### 5️⃣ Run the Application

```bash
# Start the app
streamlit run app.py
```

The app will automatically open in your browser at `http://localhost:8501`

### **Verify Installation**

Check that everything is working:

```bash
# Check Ollama is running
ollama list

# Expected output:
# NAME            ID          SIZE    MODIFIED
# gemma2:2b       ...         1.6 GB  ...
# qwen2:1.5b      ...         934 MB  ...
# llava:7b        ...         4.7 GB  ...
```

### **Troubleshooting**

**Issue: "Ollama not found"**
- Restart your terminal after installing Ollama
- Verify Ollama is in your PATH: `which ollama` (Mac/Linux) or `where ollama` (Windows)

**Issue: "Model not found"**
- Ensure models are downloaded: `ollama list`
- Re-pull model if needed: `ollama pull gemma2:2b`

**Issue: "Port already in use"**
- The app will try alternate ports automatically
- Or manually specify: `streamlit run app.py --server.port 8502`

---

## 🧠 AI Models & Performance

### **Ultra-Fast Model Strategy**
| Model | Purpose | Size | Speed | Quality |
|-------|---------|------|-------|---------|
| **Gemma2:2b** | Medical Chat & Documents | 2B params | ⚡⚡⚡⚡⚡ | ⭐⭐⭐⭐ |
| **Qwen2:1.5b** | Fallback Model | 1.5B params | ⚡⚡⚡⚡⚡ | ⭐⭐⭐⭐ |
| **LLaVA:7b** | Image Analysis | 7B params | ⚡⚡⚡ | ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐ |

### **Performance Optimizations**
- 🚀 **25-35 second average** response time with ultra-fast models
- ⚡ **Auto-model switching** between Gemma2:2b and Qwen2:1.5b
- 🎯 **Optimized prompts** for medical accuracy
- 📊 **Structured responses** with 7 standardized sections

---

## 📱 User Interface

### **Modern Medical Design**
- 🎨 **Dark medical theme** with professional styling
- 📱 **Responsive design** for desktop and mobile
- 🔄 **Real-time chat** with streaming responses
- 📋 **Structured output** with medical formatting

### **Key UI Features**
- **Sidebar toggle** for space optimization
- **Auto-scroll chat** for seamless conversation
- **File upload** with drag-and-drop support
- **Color-coded alerts** for emergency indicators

---

## 🏥 Medical Capabilities

### **Symptom Analysis**
```
Example: "I have a headache and fever"

Output:
🔍 Likely Causes:
• Tension headache from stress/dehydration
• Viral infection with systemic symptoms
• Migraine with associated symptoms

⚡ What To Do Now:
• Apply cold compress to forehead
• Rest in quiet, dark room
• Stay hydrated with water
• Take over-the-counter pain reliever

🚨 See Doctor If:
• Sudden severe headache with stiff neck
• Fever above 102°F (39°C)
• Confusion or vision changes
```

### **Document Analysis**
- **Lab Reports**: Blood work, urinalysis, cholesterol panels
- **Prescriptions**: Medication analysis and interactions
- **Medical Records**: Hospital discharge summaries
- **Test Results**: Radiology, pathology reports

### **Image Assessment**
- **Wounds & Injuries**: Cuts, bruises, burns assessment
- **Skin Conditions**: Rashes, moles, irritations
- **Emergency Triage**: Immediate care determination
- **Follow-up Guidance**: Monitoring and care instructions

---

## 🔧 Technical Architecture

### **Core Components**
```
medilens/
├── app.py                    # Main Streamlit application
├── config.py                 # AI models & prompts configuration
├── requirements.txt          # Python dependencies
├── services/
│   ├── chat_service.py       # Medical chat with Ollama
│   ├── document_service.py   # OCR & document processing
│   ├── vision_service.py     # Image analysis
│   └── safety_guard.py       # Medical scope validation
└── README.md                 # Documentation
```

### **Technology Stack**
- **Frontend**: Streamlit with custom CSS/JavaScript
- **AI Engine**: Ollama with local model inference
- **Image Processing**: OpenCV, Pillow
- **OCR**: Tesseract (optional)
- **Document**: PyPDF2, pandas
- **Deployment**: Streamlit Community Cloud ready

---

## 🛡️ Safety & Privacy

### **Medical Safety**
- ⚠️ **Emergency detection** for urgent symptoms
- 🏥 **Professional disclaimers** on all medical advice
- 📋 **Structured responses** following medical guidelines
- 🔍 **Evidence-based recommendations** with action items

### **Privacy First**
- 🔒 **100% local processing** - no external API calls
- 💻 **On-device inference** with Ollama
- 🚫 **No data logging** or external transmission
- 🔐 **HIPAA-conscious design** for medical data

---

## 📊 Performance Metrics

### **Response Times**
- **Medical Chat**: 25-35 seconds average
- **Document Analysis**: 40-50 seconds
- **Image Analysis**: 60-90 seconds
- **Model Loading**: Auto-optimized switching

### **Accuracy Metrics**
- **Medical Scope Detection**: 95%+ accuracy
- **Emergency Recognition**: Red-flag symptom alerts
- **Structured Output**: 7-section medical format
- **Follow-up Guidance**: Evidence-based recommendations

---

## 🚀 Deployment Options

### **1. Streamlit Community Cloud** (Recommended)
```bash
# Automatic deployment from GitHub
# Perfect for sharing and demo purposes
# URL: https://your-app.streamlit.app
```

### **2. Local Development**
```bash
git clone https://github.com/TashonBraganca/Medicio-Ai.git
cd Medicio-Ai
pip install -r requirements.txt
streamlit run app.py
```

### **3. Docker Deployment**
```dockerfile
# Docker support available
# Contact for enterprise deployment
```

---

## 🤝 Contributing

We welcome contributions! Please see our [Contributing Guidelines](CONTRIBUTING.md) for details.

### **Areas for Contribution**
- 🩺 Medical prompt optimization
- 🖼️ Enhanced image analysis models
- 📱 Mobile UI improvements
- 🚀 Performance optimizations

---

## 📋 Requirements

```txt
streamlit>=1.28.0
requests>=2.31.0
opencv-python>=4.8.0.74
Pillow>=10.0.0
pytesseract>=0.3.10
PyPDF2>=3.0.1
numpy>=1.24.3
pandas>=2.0.3
```

---

## 📞 Support

- **GitHub Issues**: [Report bugs or request features](https://github.com/TashonBraganca/Medicio-Ai/issues)
- **Streamlit Community**: [Deployment help](https://discuss.streamlit.io)
- **Documentation**: Comprehensive guides in `/docs`

---

## ⚖️ Legal Disclaimer

**IMPORTANT MEDICAL DISCLAIMER**: This application provides AI-powered medical information for educational and informational purposes only. It is not intended to replace professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Always consult qualified healthcare providers for medical decisions. In case of medical emergencies, contact emergency services immediately.

---

## 📄 License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

---

**Made with ❤️ for the medical community** | **Powered by Streamlit & Ollama**

Commit message:

Add searchable model selection and comprehensive improvements roadmap
Features Added:
• Searchable model selector in Settings with real-time filtering
• Active model indicator in sidebar status
• Model size display (GB/MB) for each model
• "Apply Model" button to instantly switch between AI models
• Session state persistence for model selection

Improvements:
• Added IMPROVEMENTS.md with 36 categorized enhancements
• Updated README.md with new UI features
• Enhanced user experience for model management

Technical Updates:
• Session state initialization for selected_model and model_search_query
• Direct model application to chat_service.model
• Real-time visual feedback on model changes

README.md, after:

# 🏥 MediLens - AI Medical Assistant

> **Private, Offline Medical AI Assistant** for symptom analysis, document processing, and image triage

[![Streamlit App](https://static.streamlit.io/badges/streamlit_badge_black_white.svg)](https://your-app-url.streamlit.app)
![Python](https://img.shields.io/badge/python-3.8+-blue.svg)
![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-MIT-green.svg)

## 🚀 Quick Demo

**Try the live app**: [MediLens on Streamlit Community](https://your-deployed-url.streamlit.app)

![MediLens Demo](f650c04eef1b4bf428e9.png)

---

## ✨ Features

### 💬 **Medical Chat Assistant**
- **Structured medical guidance** with 7 standardized sections
- **Emergency detection** for urgent symptoms
- **Evidence-based responses** optimized for medical accuracy
- **Ultra-fast responses** using Gemma2:2b model

### 📄 **Medical Document Analysis**
- Upload **lab reports, prescriptions, medical documents**
- **OCR text extraction** from PDFs and images
- **Critical value highlighting** with color-coded thresholds
- **Comprehensive interpretation** with actionable recommendations

### 🖼️ **Medical Image Analysis**
- **Visual assessment** of wounds, rashes, injuries
- **Emergency indicator detection** with red-flag alerts
- **Care recommendations** and follow-up guidance
- **Professional medical formatting** with clinical observations

---

## 🎯 For Streamlit Community Deployment

### **Deployment Ready!**
This app is optimized for **Streamlit Community Cloud** deployment with:
- ✅ **No external dependencies** - pure Streamlit + Python
- ✅ **Lightweight models** compatible with cloud hosting
- ✅ **Clean repository** with proper `.gitignore`
- ✅ **Requirements.txt** for easy dependency management

### **Deploy Instructions**

1. **Fork this repository**
2. **Connect to Streamlit Community**: https://share.streamlit.io
3. **Deploy**: Select your forked repo → Deploy!
4. **Configure**: The app will automatically handle model downloads

---

## 🏗️ Local Development Setup

### **Prerequisites**
- **Python 3.8+** ([Download here](https://www.python.org/downloads/))
- **8GB RAM minimum** (16GB recommended)
- **Ollama** for AI models ([Installation guide below](#ollama-installation))

### **Step-by-Step Installation**

#### 1️⃣ Install Ollama (AI Engine)

**Windows:**
```bash
# Download and run the installer
# Visit: https://ollama.com/download/windows
# Or use winget
winget install Ollama.Ollama
```

**macOS:**
```bash
# Install via Homebrew
brew install ollama

# Or download from https://ollama.com/download/mac
```

**Linux:**
```bash
# Install via curl
curl -fsSL https://ollama.com/install.sh | sh
```

#### 2️⃣ Install AI Models

After installing Ollama, open a new terminal and run:

```bash
# Install primary model (1.6 GB)
ollama pull gemma2:2b

# Install fallback model (934 MB)
ollama pull qwen2:1.5b

# Install vision model for image analysis (4.7 GB)
ollama pull llava:7b
```

**Note**: Models will download in the background. This may take 5-15 minutes depending on your internet speed.

#### 3️⃣ Clone & Setup Application

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/TashonBraganca/Medicio-Ai.git
cd Medicio-Ai

# Install Python dependencies
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

#### 4️⃣ (Optional) Install Tesseract OCR

For document scanning capabilities:

**Windows:**
```bash
# Download installer from:
# https://github.com/UB-Mannheim/tesseract/wiki
# Install and add to PATH
```

**macOS:**
```bash
brew install tesseract
```

**Linux:**
```bash
sudo apt-get install tesseract-ocr
```

#### 5️⃣ Run the Application

```bash
# Start the app
streamlit run app.py
```

The app will automatically open in your browser at `http://localhost:8501`

### **Verify Installation**

Check that everything is working:

```bash
# Check Ollama is running
ollama list

# Expected output:
# NAME            ID          SIZE    MODIFIED
# gemma2:2b       ...         1.6 GB  ...
# qwen2:1.5b      ...         934 MB  ...
# llava:7b        ...         4.7 GB  ...
```

### **Troubleshooting**

**Issue: "Ollama not found"**
- Restart your terminal after installing Ollama
- Verify Ollama is in your PATH: `which ollama` (Mac/Linux) or `where ollama` (Windows)

**Issue: "Model not found"**
- Ensure models are downloaded: `ollama list`
- Re-pull model if needed: `ollama pull gemma2:2b`

**Issue: "Port already in use"**
- The app will try alternate ports automatically
- Or manually specify: `streamlit run app.py --server.port 8502`

---

## 🧠 AI Models & Performance

### **Ultra-Fast Model Strategy**
| Model | Purpose | Size | Speed | Quality |
|-------|---------|------|-------|---------|
| **Gemma2:2b** | Medical Chat & Documents | 2B params | ⚡⚡⚡⚡⚡ | ⭐⭐⭐⭐ |
| **Qwen2:1.5b** | Fallback Model | 1.5B params | ⚡⚡⚡⚡⚡ | ⭐⭐⭐⭐ |
| **LLaVA:7b** | Image Analysis | 7B params | ⚡⚡⚡ | ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐ |

### **Performance Optimizations**
- 🚀 **25-35 second average** response time with ultra-fast models
- ⚡ **Auto-model switching** between Gemma2:2b and Qwen2:1.5b
- 🎯 **Optimized prompts** for medical accuracy
- 📊 **Structured responses** with 7 standardized sections

---

## 📱 User Interface

### **Modern Medical Design**
- 🎨 **Dark medical theme** with professional styling
- 📱 **Responsive design** for desktop and mobile
- 🔄 **Real-time chat** with streaming responses
- 📋 **Structured output** with medical formatting

### **Key UI Features**
- **Searchable model selection** - Find and switch between AI models instantly
- **Active model indicator** - Real-time display of current model in use
- **Sidebar toggle** for space optimization
- **Auto-scroll chat** for seamless conversation
- **File upload** with drag-and-drop support
- **Color-coded alerts** for emergency indicators

---

## 🏥 Medical Capabilities

### **Symptom Analysis**
```
Example: "I have a headache and fever"

Output:
🔍 Likely Causes:
• Tension headache from stress/dehydration
• Viral infection with systemic symptoms
• Migraine with associated symptoms

⚡ What To Do Now:
• Apply cold compress to forehead
• Rest in quiet, dark room
• Stay hydrated with water
• Take over-the-counter pain reliever

🚨 See Doctor If:
• Sudden severe headache with stiff neck
• Fever above 102°F (39°C)
• Confusion or vision changes
```

### **Document Analysis**
- **Lab Reports**: Blood work, urinalysis, cholesterol panels
- **Prescriptions**: Medication analysis and interactions
- **Medical Records**: Hospital discharge summaries
- **Test Results**: Radiology, pathology reports

### **Image Assessment**
- **Wounds & Injuries**: Cuts, bruises, burns assessment
- **Skin Conditions**: Rashes, moles, irritations
- **Emergency Triage**: Immediate care determination
- **Follow-up Guidance**: Monitoring and care instructions

---

## 🔧 Technical Architecture

### **Core Components**
```
medilens/
├── app.py                    # Main Streamlit application
├── config.py                 # AI models & prompts configuration
├── requirements.txt          # Python dependencies
├── services/
│   ├── chat_service.py       # Medical chat with Ollama
│   ├── document_service.py   # OCR & document processing
│   ├── vision_service.py     # Image analysis
│   └── safety_guard.py       # Medical scope validation
└── README.md                 # Documentation
```

### **Technology Stack**
- **Frontend**: Streamlit with custom CSS/JavaScript
- **AI Engine**: Ollama with local model inference
- **Image Processing**: OpenCV, Pillow
- **OCR**: Tesseract (optional)
- **Document**: PyPDF2, pandas
- **Deployment**: Streamlit Community Cloud ready

---

## 🛡️ Safety & Privacy

### **Medical Safety**
- ⚠️ **Emergency detection** for urgent symptoms
- 🏥 **Professional disclaimers** on all medical advice
- 📋 **Structured responses** following medical guidelines
- 🔍 **Evidence-based recommendations** with action items

### **Privacy First**
- 🔒 **100% local processing** - no external API calls
- 💻 **On-device inference** with Ollama
- 🚫 **No data logging** or external transmission
- 🔐 **HIPAA-conscious design** for medical data

---

## 📊 Performance Metrics

### **Response Times**
- **Medical Chat**: 25-35 seconds average
- **Document Analysis**: 40-50 seconds
- **Image Analysis**: 60-90 seconds
- **Model Loading**: Auto-optimized switching

### **Accuracy Metrics**
- **Medical Scope Detection**: 95%+ accuracy
- **Emergency Recognition**: Red-flag symptom alerts
- **Structured Output**: 7-section medical format
- **Follow-up Guidance**: Evidence-based recommendations

---

## 🚀 Deployment Options

### **1. Streamlit Community Cloud** (Recommended)
```bash
# Automatic deployment from GitHub
# Perfect for sharing and demo purposes
# URL: https://your-app.streamlit.app
```

### **2. Local Development**
```bash
git clone https://github.com/TashonBraganca/Medicio-Ai.git
cd Medicio-Ai
pip install -r requirements.txt
streamlit run app.py
```

### **3. Docker Deployment**
```dockerfile
# Docker support available
# Contact for enterprise deployment
```

---

## 🤝 Contributing

We welcome contributions! Please see our [Contributing Guidelines](CONTRIBUTING.md) for details.

### **Areas for Contribution**
- 🩺 Medical prompt optimization
- 🖼️ Enhanced image analysis models
- 📱 Mobile UI improvements
- 🚀 Performance optimizations

---

## 📋 Requirements

```txt
streamlit>=1.28.0
requests>=2.31.0
opencv-python>=4.8.0.74
Pillow>=10.0.0
pytesseract>=0.3.10
PyPDF2>=3.0.1
numpy>=1.24.3
pandas>=2.0.3
```

---

## 📞 Support

- **GitHub Issues**: [Report bugs or request features](https://github.com/TashonBraganca/Medicio-Ai/issues)
- **Streamlit Community**: [Deployment help](https://discuss.streamlit.io)
- **Documentation**: Comprehensive guides in `/docs`

---

## ⚖️ Legal Disclaimer

**IMPORTANT MEDICAL DISCLAIMER**: This application provides AI-powered medical information for educational and informational purposes only. It is not intended to replace professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. Always consult qualified healthcare providers for medical decisions. In case of medical emergencies, contact emergency services immediately.

---

## 📄 License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

---

**Made with ❤️ for the medical community** | **Powered by Streamlit & Ollama**
